# 1.4. Physical Layer and its functionalities

When receiver receives a response then it uses physical layer and when a sender receives a request it first receives in physical layer.

#### Physical Devices:
- Cables and connectors
- Physical Topology
- Devices like repeaters, hubs
- Transmission mode
- Multiplexing & demultiplexing
- Encoding

### Topology:

#### Mesh Topology:
Here all devices are connected to each other.

Let's assume that **n = no of devices / nodes**
- No of cables = nC2 `(n x(n - 1)) / 2`.
- No of ports: `n x (n - 1)`.
- Highly Reliable.
- High Cost.
- Highly Secure.
- High Maintenance
- Point to point communication (dedicated).

#### Hub or Star Topology:
A multiport centralized device is there to connect multiple devices like a star pattern.

 Let's assume that **n = no of devices / nodes**
- No of cables = n.
- No of ports: n.
- Low reliable because if hub fails then full system collapses.. Single point of failure.
- Less cost than mesh topology.
- Less secure.
- High Maintenance because of hub but lesser than mesh.
- Point to point communication (dedicated).

#### Bus Topology:
Multiple devices are connected through dropline and taps cables with a backbone (a thick ethernet cable with high bandwidth).

 Let's assume that **n = no of devices / nodes**
 - No of cables = n (dropline cables) + 1 (backbone cable).
 - No of ports = n.
 - If backbone cable fails, full network collapses. So not reliable.
 -  Not secure. The middle devices between source and destination can see the messages.
 - Cheap cost.
 - At the end point or break point of the backbone cable a repeater is being used to increase the network density.
 - Collision is there. Maximum collision is `n`.

#### Ring Topology:
If we connect both the terminals of the **Bus Topology** then it becomes a ring topology.

 Let's assume that **n = no of devices / nodes**
 - No of cables = n (dropline cables) + 1 (backbone cable).
 - No of ports = n.
 -  If backbone cable fails, full network collapses. So not reliable.
 -  Not secure. The middle devices between source and destination can see the messages.
 - Collision is there. Maximum collision is `n`. By using token `token ring` we can reduce collisions.

### Various Devices In Computer Networks

- Pure Hardware: 
	- Cables
	- Repeaters
	- Hubs
- Hardware and software
	- Switches
	- Routers
	- Bridges
- Security Devices: 
	- IDS
	- Firewall
- Modems
- Gateway

#### Cables:

**Terminologies:**

- Base: In a same time only one signal can be passed else collision is possible
- Broad: Multiple signals can be passed parallelly at a same time.
-  10 Base T (10Mbps), 100 Base T (100Mbps), Here T represents as the distance. Means after T distance the energy will be low (**Attenuation**)

**Types:**
- Unshielded twisted pair cable: 
	- 10 Base T (10Mbps), 100 Base T (100Mbps) 
- Coaxial Cable:
	- 10 Base 2: Attenuation of 10mbps after 2 meters
	- 10 Base 5: Attenuation of 10mbps after 5 meters
- Fibre optics: 
	- 100 Base Fx  -> ~ 2KM



#### Repeaters:
Due to attenuation the signal strength decreases. Due to this if there are more devices are connected further, to increase the network strength repeaters are being used.

- Repeaters matches the initial strength of the signal. Not like amplifiers.
- It is a two port hardware device.
- Repeaters supports forwarding.
- Repeaters doesn't support filtering as this completely a physical hardware.
- Maximum collision = no of devices.

#### Hub:
- It is a multiport repeater.
- Supports forwarding
- Doesn't support filtering.
- Collision domain = no of devices.

#### Bridges: (Physical & Data Link Layer)

Types:
1. **Static**: Network admin manually enters MAC address with PORTs
2. **Dynamic or transparent**: It learns automatically.
   - Initially it broadcasts all the packets. When sender sends packets then it stores that in the table. When receiver send acknowledgements with source and destination addresses then it again records the entry in that table.
   - No need for network administrator.

- It is used to connect two different LANs.
- Supports forwarding. 
- Supports filtering. Because it checks MAC addresses.
- Bridge use the **Store and forward** strategy, because it has buffers. So less collision than physical hardware.
- Uses **bridge data unit protocol** by creating a spanning tree

#### Switches:  (Physical & Data Link Layer)

- It is a multiport bridge.
- Full duplex links are there.
- Minimal traffic.
- Collision domain = 0

#### Routers: (Physical, Data Link & Network Layer):
- Supports Forwarding. If it cannot determine where to send specifically it broadcasts.
- Supports filtering,
- Uses routing table and in that table IP addresses are stored.
- Routers use the **Store and forward** strategy so it's collision domain = 0.

### Circuit Switching

- The circuit is made in such a way that it feels that a dedicated path is there for communication.
- It is a **ordered contagious** flow.
- No headers like source, destination.
- Less efficient due to reservation of bandwidth and resource.
- Middle nodes doesn't create a delay.
- Formula `Total Time = Setup Time + Transmission Time + Propagation Delay + Teardown Time`

### Packet Switching
- Works in data link (virtual circuits) and network layer (datagram circuits)
- Data always transmits into a packet.
- Pipelining works here.
- Works with **Store & forward** strategy.
- Highly efficient.
- High Delay due to storing.
- Formula `Total Time = no of switches x (Transmission Time) + Propagation Delay`

#### Datagram Switching vs Virtual Circuits 

Datagram Switching | Virtual Circuits
--- | ---
Connection less | Connection oriented
No reservation | Reserved
Out or order | Same order
Huge overhead | Low overhead
High packet lost | Low packet lost
Used in internet | Used in ATM
High cost | low cost
High Efficient | Low Efficient
Low Delay | High Delay

### Message Switching
- Predecessor or packet switching.
- Here a big message is divided into smaller packets and then it is served **Hop by hop** (means one by one).  
- High delay.
- Efficient because no reservation is there.

### Unicast, Broadcast and Multicast

- Unicast: One to one sharing
- Broadcast: 
	- Limited:  To all nodes of a single network. Generally the IP is: `255.255.255.255`
	- Direct:  To all nodes of a different network: Generally the IP becomes: `xx.255.255.255`. Here `xx` is the sender's node's network ID. For example if a node has IP of `122.09.23.3` then if it sends data to another network's all nodes then the IP becomes `122.255.255.255`
- Multicast: Sending data to a similar type of nodes. Like sending group messages in WhatsApp.