# 2.1. Data Link Layer

### Responsibilities of data link layer and its functionalities.

Data Link Layer is divided into two sections:
1. LLC: Logical Link Control
2. MAC: Media/Multiple Access Control

- **Hop to Hop** or **Node to Node** delivery
- Flow control: When a message is transmitted from source to destination then it controls the flow.
	- Stop and wait
	- Go back
	- Selective repeat
- Error control
	- CRC is used here
	- Checksum is used in transport layer
- Access control
- IP address is used for transporting data

### Stop and wait ARC Protocol
From the **Network Layer** when a packet is served then it goes to the **Physical Layer** via **Data link Layer**. And in data link layer the packet is divided into small frames. And each frame is passed one by one. While sending another frame an **acknowledgement of next accepted frame** is received from **Physical Layer** to the **Data link layer** in a **timeout**. If acknowledgement is there then the next frame is passed. It is called **stop and wait**.
- If no acknowledgement is received then it is a packet lost.


### Go Back N ARC Protocol
The **Sliding Window Protocol** is a method used in computer networks to manage the flow of data between two devices, ensuring that data is sent and received in the correct order. There are two types of sliding window protocol **Go-Back-N (GBN)**, and Selective Repeat (SR).

In **Go-Back-N**, the sender can send multiple data packets without waiting for an acknowledgement for each one. However, it can only send a certain number of packets (this is called the “window size”). If one packet is lost or not acknowledged, the sender must go back and resend that packet __and__ all the packets that followed it, even if they were received correctly. For example, if packets 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 are sent and packet 3 gets lost, the sender will have to resend packets 3, 4, and 5, even if 4 and 5 were received.


###  Selective repeat ARC Protocol
This protocol(SRP) is mostly identical to GBN protocol, except that buffers are used and the receiver, and the sender, each maintains a window of size. SRP works better when the link is very unreliable. Because in this case, retransmission tends to happen more frequently, selectively retransmitting frames is more efficient than retransmitting all of them. SRP also requires full-duplex link. backward acknowledgements are also in progress.

- Sender’s Windows ( Ws) = Receiver’s Windows ( Wr).
- Window size should be less than or equal to half the sequence number in SR protocol. This is to avoid packets being recognized incorrectly. If the size of the window is greater than half the sequence number space, then if an ACK is lost, the sender may send new packets that the receiver believes are retransmissions.
- Sender can transmit new packets as long as their number is with W of all unACKed packets.
- Sender retransmit un-ACKed packets after a timeout – Or upon a NAK if NAK is employed.
- Receiver ACKs all correct packets.
- Receiver stores correct packets until they can be delivered in order to the higher layer.
- In Selective Repeat ARQ, the size of the sender and receiver window must be at most one-half of 2^m.


### Differences between all flow control protocols

Stop and Wait | Go Back N | Selective Repeat
--- | --- | ---
Only 1 frame is transferred | Multiple frames is transferred | Multiple frames is transferred
Sender window `1` | Sender window `2^k - 1` | Sender window `2^k`
Receiver window `1` | Receiver window `1` | Receiver window `2^k`
Poor efficiency | Moderate efficiency | High efficiency. 


The data link layer needs to pack bits into frames, so that each frame is distinguishable front another. Our postal system practices a type of framing. The simple act of inserting a letter into an envelope separates one piece of information from another; the envelope serves as the delimiter.
Types:
- Fixed-Size Framing
- Variable-Size Framing